---
title: Friday, 7 April 2023
date: 2023-04-07
layout: layouts/journal.njk
---
#### 5:49 AM
#### Paris

Sitting here, looking at the lights of London as the full moon is about an hour or so from dropping beyond the horizon. There’s a glow on the eastern horizon, a faint peach color, highlighting the silhouette of pale, gray-purple clouds.

It’s the moon that still creates my shadow. But dawn is coming.

I look toward London, see the lights, three of them at the cargo pier, a cluster of lights by the huge fuel storage tanks, a couple of lights on the Eastern point. I already know what it sounds like over there. Roosters are calling. Motorcycle engines are starting. Someone still has music playing in a kia-kia. Day begins.

The sound here in Paris is a stark contrast. The only thing I hear is the rustling of coconut, palm fronds, nothing more. The tide is full, and only when you move towards the water, thirty yards away, can you hear a gentle lapping of steel-blue water against sand. Looking to the west, if you know where the breakers are, you can spy them — dull great against dark waters — but cannot hear them.

Rosy-fingered dawn is beginning to touch the high cumulus clouds, and looking skyward the dark silhouette of a frigate bird hovering in spirals. Four terns wend their toward their nesting grounds on Cook Island.

Originally, I had planned to spend three nights in the southern peninsula, a night in Poland, a night here in Paris, final night in Poland, and then ride back to London on Friday. But after one night in Poland, and then a first night here, Paris, I knew I had to stay in Paris.

It’s the peace, tranquility, the utter silence, but for sounds of nature.  Tonight’s full moon  magnifies the beauty a thousandfold.

Two nights ago it reminded me so much of the Maurice Sendak artwork from “Where the Wild Things Are.” It still does, but for the fact there is no wild rumpus. Not that I don’t enjoy a wild rumpus now and then. But right now the serenity will be carried with me a long time. We carry many things with us. Most of us do. It’s better when we can carry moments like this, lay down the heavy burdens.

Iou and Tierrebwebwe are still asleep, though it would not be uncommon for them to be awake long before now. They will want to fuss a little bit and make me breakfast, and I will back off. They always look forward to sharing meals, and most recently they purchased canned corned beef, knowing I’m not a fan of hermit crab, octopus, sea worm.

I would wager most people reading these words would see this couple as having nothing. The clothes on their back, a few more clothes, pots that look like they’re from the 18th century, too huts, a makeshift workstation table, under an old thatch awning woven from coconut-fronds.

But to ask them, they want for nothing. They understand where they live is special. Their love for each other is easy to see and appreciate. Iou’s laughter and eagerness to share and teach and talk about anything is as good as it gets. Tierrebwebwe speaks less, but when she does, she always clarifies the matter at hand.
They are connected. Technology makes it so. When I arrived back from Poland yesterday, before I even mention it, they ask about my drone, as they had received a call from Tebure the copra trader, asking did knew anything about it?

Of course they did. Later,after meal of rice and corned beef, with huge cubes of pumpkin cooked in coconut water, I showed them the drone footage, the drone circling Tebure and his copra yard.

After taking photographs of the rising moon last night, trying to find iconic photographs of palm trees and silhouette, I spy the couple sitting on rough-hewn coconut tree lumber, which Iou has felled, split, and trimmed, a faint glow between them.

I chided them for sitting on the stacked lumber, and not on the ground as they usually do. A few years older than Iou, I pointed out it was easier for men of our age to rise from a seat or bench as compared to sitting on the ground or floor. Of course they laughed, as laughter seems to be a built-in part of the vocabulary. I asked what they were doing and they were watching a 15-minute news clip of the war against Ukraine. They were unhappy with Russia’s aggression. Spoke of drones carrying bombs. A few times I have heard people here commenting about the United States going to war with China. While I know that won’t happen, it must be something in the air making the locals believe it true. I dissuade them of the idea.

A bit of the tranquility was broken, my first night just around midnight when I heard someone calling to Iou, and could see the silhouette of a man under the bright moonlight, lean toward his hut.

Earlier, while asleep, I could’ve sworn I’d heard music coming from where I now sit, on huge concrete blocks. The blocks once supported enormous fuel tanks back in London. I had imagined people had driven up from Poland to appreciate the beauty of the moonlit night. Yet I was surprised the music was so faint. Normally, based on my experiences in London, Tabwakea, Poland, the music would be cranked up, loud.

In discussing the surprise guest, I learn that he is a young man whom I photographed weeks ago, along with his brother and other men. In his early 20s, handsome, slim, tattooed, he didn’t say anything to me then, but hovered next to me no matter what I was doing. I saw him again, my first night back here, Tuesday night, near the mwaneaba, as I spoke with Keiti, as he dug in the sand near the foundation’s concrete slab, where he had something squirreled away underneath. She told me he was crazy. Would steal things from people breaking into their homes and property.

He had walked here from Poland under that full moon just so easy to do, so easy to see, even though it’s about 3 kilometres away. He wanted to go to London and thought Iou could take him. But Iou has no boat. Iou stayed with him for an hour or so before watching him leave singing to himself.

I spoke again about the music I heard, could’ve sworn I had heard. Tierrabwebwe laughed, said it was their music. They had it on very low. So as to not bother me.

“What were you listening to,” I asked?
“Bob Marley!” said Iou.
I laughed, I said course I appreciate Marley, even got to see him play back at Harvard stadium a year or so before he died.

Bob Marley, a pair of lovers, and seclusion in a tropical paradise called Paris.

It’s almost 6:30am. The dark water has not yet turned the bright and magnificent turquoise of day, but you can tell it’s coming. The whitecaps cannot be seen at the southern tip of Wood Island, where we snorkeled for an hour and a half yesterday.

High cumulus clouds, pale violet, their crowns touched with chiffon pinks and traces of magenta, ring the island, ring the lagoon, from the northern peninsula, and London around the circular lagoon, to south west and Poland.

Here in Paris, there are no clouds overhead. The moon is a finger-and-a-half over the horizon, full and glorious. The rising sun is still obscured by the high clouds. The sky above now pale blue, and now that I look out over the expense of water towards Koch Island, I can see that turquoise beginning to lighten. The whiter than white terns are active now, with their chirping squawk.

Everything’s gonna be all right.
Everything‘s gonna be all right.

<pre>______________////|__________________////|____</pre>

#### Good Friday
#### 17 km
#### 9:10 AM
#### 88°
#### leaving Paris

<pre>______________////|__________________////|____</pre>

#### 9:38 AM
#### leave Poland
#### 20 km

<pre>______________////|__________________////|____</pre>

#### 10:15 AM
#### 34.6 km
#### Carver Way and A1

I realize I have lost my old, clear, dry bag, with my bed roll. It was shaken loose from the basket where I should have double-strapped it. My small inflatable, bed pad, my cotton sleep sack. When I fail to double-strap everything down, I lose something.

<pre>______________////|__________________////|____</pre>

#### Joe’s  Hill
#### 10:40 AM – 11:25 AM

The sun is too bright.  Can’t read my phone. I’m on top of Joe’s Hill. Came here to do drone photography. I’m about to leave and realize I lost my pair of glasses. Have backtracked and double-tracked and no luck. But it’s appropriate, as my grandfather had one pair of glasses with him for all his years and he was worried about them. His eyesight was failing and he needed stronger glasses. He was 33, 34.

The temperature on my thermometer reads 103°, but it has been inside my backpack sitting here under the sun. I know the temperature is only in the 90s, but the heat and sun is relentless with no shade anywhere. I don’t know how they worked out here.

<pre>______________////|__________________////|____</pre>

#### 11:58 AM
#### 55 km
#### Main Camp

JMB Store closes on Sunday between noon and four. And holidays, like today. Good Friday is a national holiday in Kiribati. I got to JMB just in time. Had a few words with Bob Bryden regarding shipping the native crafts I have bought, as well as things from the natural environment. It seems that nothing will leave here until the boat for Tarawa in May or June. Or maybe it goes to Fiji. I’ll figure it out.

But it’s nice to know Anna and her son Bob, who owns and manage this place, as I feel like a regular. They stayed open a little extra for me so I could buy things. I was the last one to leave.  $50 got me two cans of Spam, a can of corned beef, a container of some kind of custard powder that I saw Iou using, half a dozen cans of soda, half a dozen bags of M&Ms. I’m living large.

<pre>______________////|__________________////|____</pre>

#### 12:23 PM and leaving for Tabwakea.

<pre>______________////|__________________////|____</pre>

#### 12:40
#### Tabwakea

I try to find the home of Poe, who is making a shirt for me and repairing a pair of shorts. I found her place once before, inadvertently, but I circle around and around amongst the undulating roads, the ramshackle homes. I can’t find it. I stopped by her aunt’s, the teacher, Tureta and we sit out back in her kia-kia by the lagoon and talk for an hour.

She wants me to be comfortable, make sure there is a pandanus sleeping mat for me to sit on, as compared to just the bare wood. Talks to a granddaughter to bring me two pillows. I don’t need them, but they arrive anyway. and while I will drink the local rainwater, another grandchild has run off to a local store to buy a bottle of water for me.

She offers me food, and I only took a couple bites, taking the container of papaya, noodles, and some kind of local green with me.

<pre>______________////|__________________////|____</pre>

#### 1:49 PM
#### London

45 minutes at Joe’s Hill.
23 minutes at Main Camp.
One hour in Tabwakea.
Essentially two hours and 10 minutes.

#### 11:39 AM

Which means I could have made it from Paris to London in 2 1/2 hours.

<pre>______________////|__________________////|____</pre>
